.\" Manpage for anima.
.\" Contact need-singularity/anima to correct errors or typos.
.TH ANIMA 1 "2026-04-22" "anima 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
anima \- unified CLI for the \fIbeta main\fR paradigm
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B anima
.RI [ topic ]
.RI [ subcmd ]
.RI [ args ...]
.br
.B anima
.B \-\-version
.br
.B anima
.B \-\-help
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B anima
is a single, compute-agnostic command-line entry point that dispatches to
nine topic modules implementing the need-singularity
.I beta main
paradigm (proposal stack, auto-evolution, certified self-modification).
.PP
Each topic is a thin orchestrator (\fItool/anima_cli/<topic>.hexa\fR) that
wraps existing hexa/bash tooling without duplicating logic. The top-level
command with no arguments prints a four-line global dashboard.
.PP
The nine topics are:
.B compute ,
.B weight ,
.B proposal ,
.B cert ,
.B roadmap ,
.B serve ,
.B paradigm ,
.B inbox ,
and
.B cost .
.SH TOPICS
.TP
.B compute
Pod lifecycle management.
Subcommands:
.BR start ", " stop ", " status ", " watch ", " cost ", " recover ", " ingest ", " preflight .
Controls RunPod/H100 sessions; preflight verifies network, tokens, and
weight cache before launch.
.TP
.B weight
Weight precache and decode gate control.
Subcommands:
.BR precache ", " verify ", " gate ", " status .
Manages SHA-pinned tokenizer and shard precache for reproducible launches.
.TP
.B proposal
Proposal stack operations.
Subcommands:
.BR list ", " review ", " approve ", " reject ", " implement ", " refine ", " cluster ", " inventory .
Drives the auto-evolution proposal queue under \fIstate/proposals/\fR.
.TP
.B cert
Certificate verification and DAG traversal.
Subcommands:
.BR verify ", " graph ", " dag ", " lineage .
Enforces certified self-modification invariants on proposal outputs.
.TP
.B roadmap
Roadmap progress and blocker tracking.
Subcommands:
.BR status ", " entries ", " blockers ", " roi ", " update .
Reads \fIstate/roadmap_progress.json\fR for the canonical project state.
.TP
.B serve
Persona endpoint and API control.
Subcommands:
.BR persona ", " api ", " start ", " stop ", " reload .
Manages the ALM serving layer (hexa-first; no Python).
.TP
.B paradigm
Three-paradigm unified dashboard.
Subcommands:
.BR status ", " activate ", " audit .
Surfaces proposal-stack, auto-evolution, and cert-graph paradigm health.
.TP
.B inbox
Cross-repo proposal inbox.
Subcommands:
.BR list ", " next ", " ack ", " done ", " drain .
Handles proposals arriving from upstream repositories (hexa-lang, etc.).
.TP
.B cost
Session cost tracking.
Subcommands:
.BR status ", " session ", " per-pod ", " history ", " export .
Reports session-level GPU spend and emits audit-grade CSV exports.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Print the four-line global dashboard:
.B anima status
.TP
Run a compute preflight before H100 launch:
.B anima compute preflight
.TP
Review the next pending proposal:
.B anima proposal review
.TP
Show current session cost:
.B anima cost session
.TP
Drain the cross-repo inbox:
.B anima inbox drain
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B HEXA_REPRODUCIBLE
Set to
.B 1
to force deterministic output (raw#10). Required for cert-graph verification.
.TP
.B SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH
Unix timestamp used when HEXA_REPRODUCIBLE=1 to pin wall-clock fields in
emitted JSON/JSONL artifacts.
.TP
.B HF_TOKEN
Hugging Face token used by
.B anima weight precache
to fetch gated tokenizer and shard assets.
.TP
.B RUNPOD_AUTO_CHARGE
When set to
.BR 1 ,
.B anima compute start
may auto-approve pod billing without an interactive prompt.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I bin/anima
Top-level dispatcher (pure bash; no Python).
.TP
.I tool/anima_cli/*.hexa
Per-topic orchestrator modules (one file per topic).
.TP
.I state/proposals/
Proposal stack root: \fIpending/\fR, \fIrefinement/\fR,
\fImeta/\fR, \fIinventory.json\fR.
.TP
.I state/*_result.json
Canonical result artifacts written by topic subcommands (e.g.\&
\fIproposal_cluster_detect_result.json\fR, \fIh100_launch_manifest.json\fR).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Topic or subcommand reported an error; dispatched tool's exit code propagates.
.TP
.B 2
Unknown topic or malformed invocation.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR hexa (1),
.BR runpodctl (1),
.BR hf (1)
.SH AUTHOR
need-singularity/anima
.SH VERSION
anima 0.1.0
